README.md, before:

# Grav Email Plugin

The **email plugin** for [Grav](http://github.com/getgrav/grav) adds the ability to send email. This is particularly useful for the **admin** and **login** plugins.

# Installation

The email plugin is easy to install with GPM.

```
$ bin/gpm install email
```

# Configuration

By default, the plugin uses PHP Mail as the mail engine. 

You can configure the Email plugin by using the Admin plugin, navigating to the Plugins list and choosing `Email`.

That's the easiest route. Or you can also alter the Plugin configuration by copying the `user/plugins/email/email.yaml` file into `user/config/plugins/email.yaml` and make your modifications there.

The first setting you'd likely change is your `Email from` / `Email to` names and emails.

Also, you'd likely want to setup a SMTP server instead of using PHP Mail, as the latter is not 100% reliable and you might experience problems with emails.

# Testing emails

A good way to test emails is to use a SMTP server service that's built for testing emails, for example [https://mailtrap.io](https://mailtrap.io)

Setup the Email plugin to use that SMTP server with the fake inbox data. For example enter this configuration in `user/config/plugins/email.yaml` or through the Admin panel:

```
mailer:
  engine: smtp
  smtp:
    server: mailtrap.io
    port: 2525
    encryption: none
    user: YOUR_MAILTRAP_INBOX_USER
    password: YOUR_MAILTRAP_INBOX_PASSWORD
```

That service will intercept emails and show them on their web-based interface instead of sending them for real.

You can try and fine tune the emails there while testing.

## Testing with CLI Command

You can test your email configuration with the following CLI Command:

```
$ bin/plugin email test-email -t steve@apple.com
```

You can also pass in a configuration environment:

```
$ bin/plugin email test-email -t steve@apple.com -e mysite.com
```

This will use the email configuration you have located in `user/mysite.com/config/plugins/email.yaml`. Read the docs to find out more about environment-based configuration: https://learn.getgrav.org/advanced/environment-config

# Programmatically send emails

Add this code in your plugins:

```php

        $to = 'email@test.com';
        $from = 'email@test.com';

        $subject = 'Test';
        $content = 'Test';

        $message = $this->grav['Email']->message($subject, $content, 'text/html')
            ->setFrom($from)
            ->setTo($to);

        $sent = $this->grav['Email']->send($message);
```

# Emails sent with Forms

When executing email actions during form processing, action parameters are inherited from the global configuration but may also be overridden on a per-action basis.

```
title: Custom form

form:
  name: custom_form
  fields:

    # Any fields you'd like to add to the form:
    # Their values may be referenced in email actions via '{{ form.value.FIELDNAME|e }}'

  process:
    - email:
        subject: "[Custom form] {{ form.value.name|e }}"
        body: "{% include 'forms/data.txt.twig' %}"
        from: sender@example.com
        from_name: 'Custom sender name'
        to: recipient@example.com
        to_name: 'Custom recipient name'
        content_type: 'text/plain'
        process_markdown: true
```

## Sending Attachments

You can add file inputs to your form, and send those files via Email.
Just add an `attachments` field and list the file input fields names. You can have multiple file fields, and this will send all the files as attachments. Example:

```
form:
  name: custom_form
  fields:

    -
      name: my-file
      label: 'Add a file'
      type: file
      multiple: false
      destination: user/data/files
      accept:
        - application/pdf
        - application/x-pdf
        - image/png
        - text/plain

  process:
    -
      email:
        body: '{% include "forms/data.html.twig" %}'
        attachments:
          - 'my-file'
```

## Additional action parameters

To have more control over your generated email, you may also use the following additional parameters:

* `reply_to`: Set one or more addresses that should be used to reply to the message.
* `cc` _(Carbon copy)_: Add one or more addresses to the delivery list. Many email clients will mark email in one's inbox differently depending on whether they are in the `To:` or `Cc:` list.
* `bcc` _(Blind carbon copy)_: Add one or more addresses to the delivery list that should (usually) not be listed in the message data, remaining invisible to other recipients.
* `charset`: Explicitly set a charset for the generated email body (only takes effect if `body` parameter is a string, defaults to `utf-8`)

### Specifying email addresses

Email-related parameters (`from`, `to`, `reply_to`, `cc`and `bcc`) allow different notations for single / multiple values:

#### Single email address string

```
to: mail@example.com
```

####  Multiple email address strings

```
to:
  - mail@example.com
  - mail+1@example.com
  - mail+2@example.com
```

#### Single email address with name

```
to:
  mail: mail@example.com
  name: Human-readable name
```

#### Multiple email addresses (with and without names)

```
to:
  -
    mail: mail@example.com
    name: Human-readable name
  -
    mail: mail+2@example.com
    name: Another human-readable name
  -
    mail+3@example.com
  -
    mail+4@example.com
```

## Multi-part MIME messages

Apart from a simple string, an email body may contain different MIME parts (e.g. HTML body with plain text fallback). You may even specify a different charset for each part (default to `utf-8`):

```
body:
  -
    content_type: 'text/html'
    body: "{% include 'forms/default/data.html.twig' %}"
  -
    content_type: 'text/plain'
    body: "{% include 'forms/default/data.txt.twig' %}"
    charset: 'iso-8859-1'
```

# Troubleshooting

## Emails are not sent

As explained above in the Configuration section, if you're using the default settings, set the Plugin configuration to use a SMTP server. It can be [Gmail](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-google-s-smtp-server) or another SMTP server you have at your disposal. 

This is the first thing to check. The reason is that PHP Mail, the default system used by the Plugin, is not 100% reliable and emails might not arrive.

Commit message:

Remove deprecated PHP `mail` engine

README.md, after:

# Grav Email Plugin

The **email plugin** for [Grav](http://github.com/getgrav/grav) adds the ability to send email. This is particularly useful for the **admin** and **login** plugins.

# Installation

The email plugin is easy to install with GPM.

```
$ bin/gpm install email
```

# Configuration

By default, the plugin uses PHP Mail as the mail engine. 

You can configure the Email plugin by using the Admin plugin, navigating to the Plugins list and choosing `Email`.

That's the easiest route. Or you can also alter the Plugin configuration by copying the `user/plugins/email/email.yaml` file into `user/config/plugins/email.yaml` and make your modifications there.

The first setting you'd likely change is your `Email from` / `Email to` names and emails.

Also, you'd likely want to setup a SMTP server instead of using PHP Mail, as the latter is not 100% reliable and you might experience problems with emails.

# Testing emails
> NOTE: `engine: mail` has been deprecated from the SwiftMail library that this plugin uses as it does not funtion at all.  Please use `smtp` if at all possibe, and `sendmail` if SMTP is not an option.

A good way to test emails is to use a SMTP server service that's built for testing emails, for example [https://mailtrap.io](https://mailtrap.io)

Setup the Email plugin to use that SMTP server with the fake inbox data. For example enter this configuration in `user/config/plugins/email.yaml` or through the Admin panel:

```
mailer:
  engine: smtp
  smtp:
    server: mailtrap.io
    port: 2525
    encryption: none
    user: YOUR_MAILTRAP_INBOX_USER
    password: YOUR_MAILTRAP_INBOX_PASSWORD
```

That service will intercept emails and show them on their web-based interface instead of sending them for real.

You can try and fine tune the emails there while testing.

## Testing with CLI Command

You can test your email configuration with the following CLI Command:

```
$ bin/plugin email test-email -t steve@apple.com
```

You can also pass in a configuration environment:

```
$ bin/plugin email test-email -t steve@apple.com -e mysite.com
```

This will use the email configuration you have located in `user/mysite.com/config/plugins/email.yaml`. Read the docs to find out more about environment-based configuration: https://learn.getgrav.org/advanced/environment-config

# Programmatically send emails

Add this code in your plugins:

```php

        $to = 'email@test.com';
        $from = 'email@test.com';

        $subject = 'Test';
        $content = 'Test';

        $message = $this->grav['Email']->message($subject, $content, 'text/html')
            ->setFrom($from)
            ->setTo($to);

        $sent = $this->grav['Email']->send($message);
```

# Emails sent with Forms

When executing email actions during form processing, action parameters are inherited from the global configuration but may also be overridden on a per-action basis.

```
title: Custom form

form:
  name: custom_form
  fields:

    # Any fields you'd like to add to the form:
    # Their values may be referenced in email actions via '{{ form.value.FIELDNAME|e }}'

  process:
    - email:
        subject: "[Custom form] {{ form.value.name|e }}"
        body: "{% include 'forms/data.txt.twig' %}"
        from: sender@example.com
        from_name: 'Custom sender name'
        to: recipient@example.com
        to_name: 'Custom recipient name'
        content_type: 'text/plain'
        process_markdown: true
```

## Sending Attachments

You can add file inputs to your form, and send those files via Email.
Just add an `attachments` field and list the file input fields names. You can have multiple file fields, and this will send all the files as attachments. Example:

```
form:
  name: custom_form
  fields:

    -
      name: my-file
      label: 'Add a file'
      type: file
      multiple: false
      destination: user/data/files
      accept:
        - application/pdf
        - application/x-pdf
        - image/png
        - text/plain

  process:
    -
      email:
        body: '{% include "forms/data.html.twig" %}'
        attachments:
          - 'my-file'
```

## Additional action parameters

To have more control over your generated email, you may also use the following additional parameters:

* `reply_to`: Set one or more addresses that should be used to reply to the message.
* `cc` _(Carbon copy)_: Add one or more addresses to the delivery list. Many email clients will mark email in one's inbox differently depending on whether they are in the `To:` or `Cc:` list.
* `bcc` _(Blind carbon copy)_: Add one or more addresses to the delivery list that should (usually) not be listed in the message data, remaining invisible to other recipients.
* `charset`: Explicitly set a charset for the generated email body (only takes effect if `body` parameter is a string, defaults to `utf-8`)

### Specifying email addresses

Email-related parameters (`from`, `to`, `reply_to`, `cc`and `bcc`) allow different notations for single / multiple values:

#### Single email address string

```
to: mail@example.com
```

####  Multiple email address strings

```
to:
  - mail@example.com
  - mail+1@example.com
  - mail+2@example.com
```

#### Single email address with name

```
to:
  mail: mail@example.com
  name: Human-readable name
```

#### Multiple email addresses (with and without names)

```
to:
  -
    mail: mail@example.com
    name: Human-readable name
  -
    mail: mail+2@example.com
    name: Another human-readable name
  -
    mail+3@example.com
  -
    mail+4@example.com
```

## Multi-part MIME messages

Apart from a simple string, an email body may contain different MIME parts (e.g. HTML body with plain text fallback). You may even specify a different charset for each part (default to `utf-8`):

```
body:
  -
    content_type: 'text/html'
    body: "{% include 'forms/default/data.html.twig' %}"
  -
    content_type: 'text/plain'
    body: "{% include 'forms/default/data.txt.twig' %}"
    charset: 'iso-8859-1'
```

# Troubleshooting

## Emails are not sent

As explained above in the Configuration section, if you're using the default settings, set the Plugin configuration to use a SMTP server. It can be [Gmail](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-google-s-smtp-server) or another SMTP server you have at your disposal. 

This is the first thing to check. The reason is that PHP Mail, the default system used by the Plugin, is not 100% reliable and emails might not arrive.
